Bank of England holds rates and policy steady
High quality global journalism requires investment. Please share this article with others using the link below, do not cut & paste the article. See our Ts&Cs and Copyright Policy for more detail. Email ftsales.support@ft.com to buy additional rights. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/38ecec02-a520-11e3-8988-00144feab7de.html#ixzz3tqqknleK

The Bank of England has held monetary policy steady in line with governor Mark Carney’s assurances that interest rates are unlikely to rise soon.
The nine-member Monetary Policy Committee voted to hold rates at their record low of 0.5 per cent and to maintain the stock of the central bank’s gilt purchases at £375bn, as expected.

Under the BoE’s revised forward guidance policy, announced at last month’s inflation report, rather than focusing on a single indicator, the central bank will monitor a broad range of measures of slack in the economy, including participation in the labour market, average hours worked, recruitment difficulties, wage growth and the extent of involuntary part-time working.
It aims to ensure that the economy eliminates this slack over the next two to three years and “absorbs spare capacity further” before raising interest rates. Currently the market is not expecting interest rate rises before spring of 2015, and then only very gradual rises.
Andrew Goodwin, senior economic adviser to the EY Item club, said the decision to keep rates on hold was unsurprising considering that the UK economy remained “fragile, and raising rates prematurely could put a stick in the spokes of the recovery”.
He added: “The minutes due to be released later in March will clarify exactly how the bank’s thought process has changed since the transition to phase two of forward guidance. The MPC members have all spoken with one voice over the past month, and we would hope that the next set of minutes would provide a window into any differences of opinion between them.
“We expect to see more narrative surrounding the finer details of the UK economy, particularly on the level of spare capacity, an issue which is likely to provoke some debate with the committee.”

Concerns about the emergence of a possible residential housing bubble were fanned on Thursday morning when Halifax reported a 2.4 per cent surge in house prices month-on-month in February. The year-on-year increase climbed to 7.9 per cent in the three months to February, the largest increase since October 2007. However on the Halifax’s measure, average house prices remain under 10 per cent below the peak.
This is the latest in a series of indicators pointing to a rapidly improving housing market. On Monday, the BoE said that mortgage approvals for January rose to the highest level in six years.
The BoE has previously said that, outside London, it was not concerned about a housing market bubble. MPC member David Miles said in an interview with Bloomberg that policy makers would only use the “blunt instrument” of interest rate rises as a last resort to cool the housing market.
“If you did get into a situation where the tools that the Financial Policy Committee have seem not up to the job of stopping overheating in the housing market, we would then turn to the blunter instrument of using bank rate. We’re a long way from that,” Mr Miles said.
David Kern, chief economist at the British Chambers of Commerce, said calls for early rate rises were “unwelcome”, adding: “Even though we are getting closer to pre-recession GDP levels, this does not mean that the economy is back to normal.”
