Bank of England’s Mark Carney drops jobs link with interest rates
High quality global journalism requires investment. Please share this article with others using the link below, do not cut & paste the article. See our Ts&Cs and Copyright Policy for more detail. Email ftsales.support@ft.com to buy additional rights. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/08eea0fe-93c8-11e3-bf0c-00144feab7de.html#ixzz3tqo7TN8W

Interest rates are unlikely to rise before next year’s election, the Bank of England indicated on Wednesday, as it unveiled bullish economic forecasts that boost George Osborne’s claim that the economic recovery is on track.
Ditching the previous guidance linking interest rates to unemployment, Mark Carney, the governor, said the central bank would no longer tie its future policy decisions to any particular economic indicator.
High quality global journalism requires investment. Please share this article with others using the link below, do not cut & paste the article. See our Ts&Cs and Copyright Policy for more detail. Email ftsales.support@ft.com to buy additional rights. http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/08eea0fe-93c8-11e3-bf0c-00144feab7de.html#ixzz3tqoAARwo

If they prove accurate, the new forecasts will provide the chancellor with the perfect economic backdrop for next year’s election, with rapid growth, falling unemployment, recovering incomes and productivity and no threat from rising interest rates.
The bank’s Monetary Policy Committee said it was willing to see boom-time rates of growth, even as interest rates might need to “remain at low levels for some time to come”. It was confident, it made clear, that inflation would remain under control.
In a more transparent set of forecasts than before, the BoE now expects the economy to grow 3.4 per cent in 2014, compared with its previous 2.8 per cent forecast, and much higher than most independent analysts.
Michael Saunders, an economist at Citi, noted this was the fourth consecutive large upgrade to the MPC’s growth outlook – the biggest run of upgrades since the BoE was made independent in 1997.
The new forecasts include an expectation of a 11.5 per cent surge in business investment and a 23 per cent leap in investment in house building, which includes estate agent fees. In contrast, the BoE is very pessimistic about Britain’s export performance, with net trade being a drag on the economy this year, in 2015 and in 2016.
The BoE’s new guidance suggested markets were right not to expect a rate rise before the election and that gradual rises thereafter would only reach a level close to 2 per cent in three years’ time.
The rate-setters came to that view after judging there was still slack in the economy amounting to 1 to 1.5 per cent of national income, and that this would decline slowly despite rapid growth because as unemployment fell, productivity growth would recover and part-timers would increase their hours of work.
“The message to business is that we’re going to set an appropriate path for monetary policy so that the economy continues to grow,” Mr Carney told a press conference. “When the point comes [for rates to start rising] the adjustments will be gradual and limited.”
He added: “The MPC will not take risks with this recovery.”
Simon Wells, an economist at HSBC, said: “Phase two of forward guidance offered no new targets or thresholds, but by arguing that there is a lot of spare capacity and with inflation projected to be below target two to three years ahead, governor Carney wanted to send a signal that rates aren’t moving soon. . . The MPC is still trying to be dovish and we still think rates will be on hold until Q3 2015.”

The previous guidance given by the MPC was to wait until unemployment reached 7 per cent, but the committee expects that to have happened in the first quarter of 2014 – in effect leaving the new guidance on interest rates already in place.
Jonathan Loynes, chief European economist at the consultancy Capital Economics, said the “second phase” of guidance “obviously lacks the simplicity of the previous one”.
“There is a clear concern that, in putting more focus on the general degree of spare capacity, it replaces the unemployment rate with an even more unpredictable, and much less observable, economic concept,” he added.
Sterling moved higher as the inflation report was published. Having been flat against the dollar beforehand, the pound was up 0.5 per cent at $1.6519. Ten-year gilt yields jumped five basis points to 2.79 per cent, indicating that those betting in financial markets thought the BoE’s tone was more hawkish than the view of most economists.
