Bank of England in no rush to raise interest rates
Bank Governor Mark Carney says there is enough spare capacity in the economy for interest rates to stay low, but adds that the time for rate rises is edging closer.
Interest rates will remain on hold this year, the Bank of England has signalled, but households must be prepared for a gradual increase in borrowing costs amid a backdrop of “robust” growth and rapidly falling unemployment.
Britain will expand at the fastest pace since before the financial crisis this year, the Bank's forecasts showed. Governor Mark Carney said growth would become broader-based and more sustainable, moving "from a recovery supported by household spending to an expansion sustained by business investment".
"The economy has started to head back towards normal," he said.
Mr Carney effectively quashed speculation that rates could rise before the end of this year, and stressed that interest rates would remain at their record low of 0.5pc for "some time" while the recovery became more entrenched. But he said the point at which the Bank would have to raise rates was getting nearer.
"As time has moved on and the recovery has been sustained, the economy has edged closer to the point at which Bank Rate will need gradually to rise," he said.
In its quarterly Inflation Report, the Bank upgraded its forecasts for second quarter growth to 0.8pc, from a forecast of 0.7pc in February. Its growth projection for 2014 was unchanged at 3.4pc, matching the growth seen in 2007.
The Bank also expects the UK economy to expand by 2.9pc in 2015, up from a previous forecast of 2.7pc. The unemployment rate, which fell to 6.8pc in the first quarter from 7.2pc in the final three months of 2013, is expected to drop to 5.9pc by the beginning of 2017, down from a previous forecast of 6.3pc, while inflation is expected to remain close to the Bank's 2pc target over the period. "The recent strong performance of the UK economy has continued," the Bank said.
Despite the bullish forecasts, and a "modest narrowing" of the amount of spare capacity in the economy - or the amount the economy can grow without pushing up inflation - Bank policymakers said they were in no rush to raise rates because there was enough room for the economy to expand further without pushing up prices.
"The [Bank] judged that there was scope to make further inroads into slack before an increase in Bank rate was necessary," it said. Mr Carney compared securing the recovery with England's progress in the World Cup. "[Qualifying] is an achievement, but not the ultimate goal," he said.
"The real tournament is just beginning and its prize is a strong, sustained and balanced expansion."
The pound, which had been rising on expectations that the Bank would admit rates were likely to rise before the election, fell by almost half a cent against the dollar on Wednesday. Markets still expect rates to rise in the first quarter of 2015 before the general election.
Mr Carney also said that rate hikes would not be used to cool the housing market, and described monetary policy as “the last line of defence” against financial stability risks. He said while the Bank’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) - which is in charge of maintaining financial stability - had a broad range of tools that it could use to cool the market in a “graduated and proportionate” way, he said the Bank could not “perform miracles”, nor build the houses Britain needed to address the country’s chronic housing shortage.
“What we don’t have at the FPC and never will have is the ability to control all aspects of the housing market - we can’t perform miracles,” he said. “What the FPC can do is reduce risks that emanate from the housing market.”
However, economists said monetary policy was inextricably linked to financial stability. “Lower inflation appears to be buying the Bank time before a rate rise is needed, but there may be grounds to be more concerned given that we are seeing notable gains in asset prices,” said George Buckley, chief UK economist at Deutsche Bank.
“The Bank argues that asset price bubbles - such as that in London property, which may in turn spread out to the rest of the country - needs to be dealt with by the FPC ... But bubbles are rarely isolated - they are often generated by prolonged periods of loose economic policy, and have potentially sizable knock-on effects. House price rises, for example, increase the wealth of the owner, thereby reducing the need for saving and encouraging spending. Consumer spending then feeds into GDP, and spare capacity is used up more quickly. In turn, inflation may rise as a result, thus requiring a monetary policy response - in other words, higher interest rates.”
Some economists noted that the Bank’s inflation forecast was not consistent with its bullish growth and employment projections. Others said the Bank risked having to raise rates sharply if it left rates low for too long.
“The longer the MPC leave rates ultra-low with slack shrinking rapidly, the more likely it will be that tightening – when it comes – will not be 'gradual’ and will not leave the eventual level of rates below the pre-crisis norm,” said Michael Saunders, chief UK economist at Citibank.
