Inflation pushes Bank of England to the 'edge' on interest rates
The economy’s relentless progress, higher levels of employment, and the growing confidence of British companies mean the day when the MPC will raise interest rates is drawing ever closer.
Mark Carney could learn a thing or two from former European Central Bank president Jean Claude-Trichet.
In the days when Trichet was at the helm of the Frankfurt-based institution, the mere mention of the words "strong vigilance" or "heightened alertness" during its monthly press conference was enough for markets to price in a rate rise.
The former almost certainly meant rates would rise the following month, while the latter was also a signal that tighter monetary policy was on the way.
They say imitation is the greatest form of flattery. But when it comes to the Bank of England Governor’s attempts at “doing a Trichet” – there’s certainly room for improvement.
Take Carney’s opening remarks at the May Inflation Report – or the Bank’s quarterly assessment of the health of the economy. “As time has moved on and the recovery has been sustained, the economy has edged closer to the point at which Bank Rate will need gradually to rise,” he declared.
But the statement could be interpreted in two ways. Was the emphasis on “edged”? Had we “edged closer” to a rate rise, implying that the economy was moving more slowly towards its goal? Or was the key word “closer”? If the economy had “edged closer” to an increase, surely rate rises were on the way?
Carney’s emphasis was on the former, even though the data suggested little change in the Bank’s economic forecasts from the previous three months. Markets and analysts were left baffled.
In its defence, telling the world when interest rates will rise has never been the Bank’s job – nor its intention. The closest to that was in February, when a number of policymakers appeared to endorse the market view that the first rate rise from 0.5pc would come close to next May’s general election.
Bank staff have since moved away from hinting at the timing of rate rises, but that hasn’t stopped investors trying to second guess Carney’s next move. In June, Carney upstaged the Chancellor at the annual Mansion House dinner by declaring that interest rate rises “could happen sooner than markets currently expect”, and traders quickly moved to price in a November rate rise.
Expectations shifted again after Carney told MPs that he only made the statement because expectations for a rate rise this year were too low.
Of course, that didn’t mean there would be a rate rise this year. “The clearest indication of when rates will rise is when they rise,” was his most recent statement last month. No wonder the Bank has been branded an “unreliable boyfriend”.
Policymakers want markets to move with the data. And judging by recent developments, the case for tighter monetary policy has become more compelling.
While the economy did not expand as rapidly as the Bank had forecast during the second quarter, annual growth of 3.1pc means Britain is still expanding at its fastest rate since before the financial crisis.
Several sectors of the economy are growing so quickly that they are finding it difficult to recruit the right staff. A shortage of labour means skilled workers are demanding higher pay for the same work, adding to concerns that pay rises will push up prices, forcing the Bank to raise interest rates sooner rather than later.
“In London you can’t move for the amount of cranes there are at the moment, and that means there are pressures on labour, and labour costs therefore increase,” says Rob Heasman, a development director at Lend Lease, the former owner of the Bluewater shopping centre in Kent.
David Richardson, head of manufacturing at Lloyds Bank Commercial Banking, says stronger growth has given his clients “the confidence to see more of the world as an export market”. Richardson also reveals that most businesses are much less worried about rate rises than many believe.
“I’ve probably had conversations with three dozen manufacturers this week, and interest rates haven’t been raised in any of them. Even sterling’s rise – another kind of monetary policy tightening – seems less of an issue today.”
While staff shortages mean some workers have been awarded higher pay, others have been stuck on the same salary for years. Average wage growth, at 0.3pc in the three months to May, remains weak, and the fear is that the abysmal productivity growth in the UK will continue.
If output per worker growth remains weak, the pressure on companies to keep costs low will increase, and wages will have to be held down.
The Bank will eventually find itself in a situation where it is forced to raise rates to keep a lid on inflation as spare capacity is absorbed, even in the absence of wage growth. If consumer borrowing costs go up and wages don’t, many will have to dip into their savings or cut back on other spending to make ends meet.
This would be bound to slow the economy – and if rate hikes are left too late, and the cost of borrowing has to be jacked up suddenly, even push it back into a recession.
Although inflation on the consumer price index measure jumped to 1.9pc in June, from 1.5pc in May, it remains below the Bank of England’s 2pc target. Sushil Wadhwani, a dovish former member of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), said this is one of the reasons the Bank can afford to keep rates lower for longer.
“The MPC started off by telling us that spare capacity was between 1pc and 1.5pc. If I were on the committee I’d be wondering if the spare capacity number at the beginning of the year was much higher because unemployment has come down more than we thought, and yet wages have undershot their forecast,” he says.
Hawks argue that wage rises no longer reflect the overall spare capacity in the economy. They believe that rates need to go up now to prevent a misallocation of capital and to make sure that zombie firms are put out of their misery, allowing their resources to be shifted to more productive uses.
In any case, the Bank has pledged that any rate rises will be “limited and gradual”. Carney recently told MPs that markets saw the second half of this pledge as an opportunity to price in “half the rate of the previous tightening cycles in the UK”.
Between November 2003 and August 2004, when the Bank raised rates from 3.5pc to 4.75pc and August 2006 and July 2007, when rates were raised from 4.5pc to 5.75pc, the Bank tightened policy approximately once a quarter and by 0.25 percentage points each time.
Of course, the economy is very different now to back then. Any rate rise would be the first in almost six years, and from a level close to zero. But does this mean the Bank could be ultra-careful and raise rates by – say – 0.125 percentage points per quarter instead?
There is nothing stopping the Committee from doing this, although the MPC has never chosen this option since it was made independent in 1997. Either way, the economy is completely different to a year ago. Unemployment has fallen to 6.5pc, almost a million more people are in work, and the UK economy is one of the fastest growing in the G7. Yet wage growth remains painfully weak.
Some, no doubt, will keep on arguing that rates musn’t go up until wages rise – but at some point even the most dovish of MPC members will crack, and rates will finally go up, regardless of what is happening to pay. When exactly we do not know – but it is clear that the era of ultra-cheap money is nearly over.
