Interest rates kept on hold as low inflation lets Bank of England wait for recovery to spread
Interest rates were left unchanged at 0.5 per cent again today as Bank of England policymakers allow the UK's recovery to gather pace.
Despite a series of recent upbeat surveys and predictions for the UK economy, falls in the rate of inflation mean the Bank's monetary policy committee has the luxury of leaving rates at their five-year record low.
Howard Archer chief UK and European economist at IHS Global Insight said: ‘There was never any doubt that the Bank of England would leave interest rates at 0.50 per cent at its April MPC meeting and this duly proved to be the case.
‘The second quarter of 2015 currently looks the prime candidate for when the Bank of England starts to inch interest rates up – given both the inflation forecasts contained in the Bank of England’s February Quarterly Inflation Report and the general drift of comments made by MPC members in recent weeks.
‘The Bank of England clearly wants to nurture recovery and not to risk choking it off by raising interest rates too early or too fast,’ Archer added.
Some economists believe rates could be hiked before the May 2015 General Election as the economy heats up. But others see greater weakness in the UK economy.
Martin Beck at the EY ITEM Club said the case for a rate hike continues to remain very weak: 'Indeed, the MPC’s mandate, to keep inflation close to 2 per cent, is likely to be missed with a substantial undershooting over the next few months. We expect rates to remain on hold until late 2015.' 
Members of the MPC hastily finished their meeting last night in order for some to attend the International Monetary Fund meeting in Washington – but the announcement was still made at midday today.
Since the consumer prices index rate of inflation last month fell to 1.7 per cent, well below the Bank’s target rate of 2 per cent, the MPC has room to keep rates on hold despite robust growth in the real economy.
Speculation over the timing of the first rate rise grew this week after the IMF hiked its growth forecasts for the UK economy. It predicted that the UK is set to become the world's fastest-growing major advanced economy this year with GDP seen increasing by 2.9 per cent.
The National Institute of Economic and Social Research added to the optimism with data showing Britain's gross domestic product rose by 0.9 per cent in the first three months of the year.
That predicted growth would be the UK economy's best performance since the second quarter of 2010 and would leave economic output only 0.6 per cent below its 2008 peak.
Official manufacturing figures also released this week showed factory output rose 1 per cent  in February and was 3.8 per cent higher than a year earlier – making it the best performance for three years.
Manufacturing also enjoyed a boost from food, drinks, tobacco, pharmaceuticals and transport equipment. This robust performance has led to hopes that the much-needed economic recovery will be more balanced and easily sustained.
The IMF’s World Economic Outlook report, regarded as the most authoritative gauge of the global economy, said Britain’s economy will grow at a faster pace than all other leading industrial nations in 2014.
 
Additionally, it showed the UK powering ahead, likely to generate a further 2.5 per cent growth in 2015.
In an abrupt U-turn, the IMF also backed the austerity-focused policies pursued by Chancellor George Osborne and Bank of England governor Mark Carney.
Last year, the IMF had warned against Osborne’s policies of austerity and said he was ‘playing with fire’. 
But with Britain now top of the Group of Seven richest nations growth league, the IMF’s top economist Olivier Blanchard is now doing his best to change his past prediction.
However, the IMF did send out a warning over the risk posed by Britain's surging house prices, which was emphasised by a report from the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors today.
British house prices picked up speed in March and sales reached a six-year high, according to RICS, whose members added a warning about the dangers of demand outstripping stagnant supply. 
House prices rose in every area of Britain in March, but were up by the most in London and the South East.
Despite the burgeoning property market, GDP remains below its pre-recession level six years ago and results last week from the latest monthly purchasing managers surveys for the three main sectors of the economy are unlikely to shake the MPC from its cautious view over the fragile state of the recovery.

The construction, manufacturing and services sectors were all continuing to grow robustly in March, but the pace of expansion has slackened off, indicating that the recovery has slowed to its weakest pace in nine months.
The Bank had pledged not to lift interest rates until a fall in unemployment to 7 per cent but that policy of forward guidance has now been abandoned after joblessness declined much quicker than had been expected, with that target reached, as growth picked up speed last year.
Rate-setters are now using a new ‘fuzzy’ guidance linking monetary policy to a more opaque measure of how far the economy is running below its capacity. 
Howard Archer of IHS Global Insight added: ‘The MPC is not taking sustained recovery for granted and very much wants to see it become more balanced with business investment seeing sustained improvement and exports increasingly kicking in.
‘There are some signs that the UK economy may recently have lost a little momentum, although it still appears to be growing at a healthy clip.’
He added that despite unemployment falling more quickly than expected, there remained ‘slack’ in the labour market ‘right across the country’, more of which needed to be used up before any hike.
The Bank has indicated that more sustainable growth is needed before any hike.
However, last week, Bank governor Mark Carney refused to rule out that there could be a rise in interest rates before next year's General Election, scheduled for May 2015, but stressed that any rise would be gradual.
And the pound has pushed higher this week as the upbeat economic news triggered speculation that interest rates indeed could rise before the general election.
Alex Edwards, a currency expert at UKForex, said the ‘very impressive’ manufacturing numbers ‘will serve to boost expectations for an early rate hike – perhaps even as early as January or February next year and certainly before the UK general election’.
‘The reason the pound has been such a buy so far this year is due to talk of interest rate hikes,’ said Lee McDarby, a currency expert at Nomura, which is predicting rates to rise in November this year.
However, Martin Weale, a member of the MPC, has previously indicated that a rise in the cost of borrowing was likely next spring, and appeared to suggest it would come before the May general election.
Stephen Lewis, chief economist at Monument Securities said: ‘There have been indications, from business surveys and hard data, that the UK economy may be losing a little of its momentum well before the MPC is obliged to recognise that slack in the economy has been exhausted. There have even been signs that the impetus behind the housing market’s advance is flagging. 
‘There is a good chance, then, that the MPC will be able to hold Bank Rate at its present level until the middle of next year without departing from its current policy framework.
‘If not, then Mr Osborne will presumably claim the rate hike as confirmation that the economy, under his stewardship, has recovered.’
Rob Wood, a former Bank of England economist now at Berenberg, said he expects rates to rise to 0.75 per cent in the first three months of 2015 and reach 1.5 per cent by the end of next year. ‘The recovery is snowballing,’ he said.
